Bangladesh,[a] officially the People's Republic of Bangladesh,[b] is a country in South Asia. It is the eighth-most populous country in the world and twelfth-most densely populated with a population of 173,562,364 in an area of 148,460 square kilometres (57,320 sq mi). Bangladesh shares land borders with India to the north, west, and east, and Myanmar to the southeast. To the south, it has a coastline along the Bay of Bengal. To the north, it is separated from Bhutan and Nepal by the Siliguri Corridor, and from China by the mountainous Indian state of Sikkim. Dhaka, the capital and largest city, is the nation's political, financial, and cultural centre. Chittagong is the second-largest city and the busiest port. The official language is Bengali, with Bangladeshi English also used in government. Islam is the official and largest religion and Bengali Muslims form the largest ethnoreligious group in the country.
Bangladesh is part of the historic and ethnolinguistic region of Bengal, which was divided during the Partition of British India in 1947 as the eastern exclave of the Dominion of Pakistan.[18] Ancient Bengal was known as Gangaridai and was a stronghold of pre-Islamic kingdoms. The Muslim conquest after 1204 led to the sultanate and Mughal periods, during which an independent Bengal Sultanate and wealthy Mughal Bengal transformed the region into an important centre of regional affairs, trade, and diplomacy. The Battle of Plassey in 1757 marked the beginning of British rule for next 200 years. The creation of Eastern Bengal and Assam in 1905 set a precedent for the emergence of Bangladesh. The All-India Muslim League, which was founded in Dhaka in 1906,[19] fought for a separate Bengali Muslim homeland in the Eastern Bengal, which was proposed in the Lahore Resolution in 1940 by A. K. Fazlul Huq, the first Prime Minister of Bengal. The present-day territorial boundary was established with the announcement of the Radcliffe Line.
In 1947, East Bengal became the most populous province in the Dominion of Pakistan and was renamed East Pakistan, with Dhaka as the legislative capital. The Bengali Language Movement in 1952, the 1958 Pakistani coup d'état, and the 1970 Pakistani general election spurred Bengali nationalism and pro-democracy movements. The refusal of the Pakistani military junta to transfer power to the Awami League, led by Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, triggered the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971. The Mukti Bahini waged a successful armed revolution; the conflict saw the Bangladeshi genocide. The country came into existence on 16 December 1971 after the surrender of Pakistan, ending the 9-month long Liberation War.[18]
After the war, Sheikh Mujib became the leader of the country. Mujib's assassination in 1975 led to the rise of Ziaur Rahman, who himself was assassinated in 1981. The 1980s was dominated by the presidency of Hussain Muhammad Ershad, who was overthrown in a mass uprising in 1990. After 1990, the "Battle of the Begums" between Khaleda Zia and Sheikh Hasina defined Bangladesh's politics and history for next 35 years.[20][21][22] Following the overthrow of Hasina in a student–led mass uprising in August 2024, an interim government led by Nobel Peace laureate Muhammad Yunus took power.
A middle power in the Indo-Pacific,[23] Bangladesh is home to the fifth-most spoken native language, the third-largest Muslim-majority population, and the second-largest economy in South Asia. It maintains the third-largest military in the region and is the largest contributor to UN peacekeeping operations.[24] Bangladesh is a unitary parliamentary republic based on the Westminster system. Bengalis make up almost 99% of the population.[25] The country consists of eight divisions, 64 districts, and 495 subdistricts, and includes the world's largest mangrove forest. Bangladesh has one of the largest refugee populations in the world due to the Rohingya genocide in neighboring Myanmar.[26] Bangladesh faces challenges like corruption, political instability, overpopulation, and the effects of climate change. Bangladesh has twice chaired the Climate Vulnerable Forum and hosts the Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC) headquarters. It is a founding member of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) and a member of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the Commonwealth of Nations.
Etymology
Main article: Names of Bengal
The etymology of Bangladesh ("Bengali country") can be traced to the early 20th century, when Bengali patriotic songs, such as Aaji Bangladesher Hridoy by Rabindranath Tagore and Namo Namo Namo Bangladesh Momo by Kazi Nazrul Islam, used the term in 1905 and 1932 respectively.[27] Starting in the 1950s, Bengali nationalists used the term in political rallies in East Pakistan.
The term Bangla is a major name for both the Bengal region and the Bengali language. The origins of the term Bangla are unclear, with theories pointing to a Bronze Age proto-Dravidian tribe,[28] and the Iron Age Vanga Kingdom.[29] The earliest known usage of the term is the Nesari plate in 805 AD. The term Vangala Desa is found in 11th-century South Indian records.[30][31] The term gained official status during the Sultanate of Bengal in the 14th century.[32][33] Shamsuddin Ilyas Shah proclaimed himself as the first "Shah of Bangala" in 1342.[32] The word Bangāl became the most common name for the region during the Islamic period.[34] 16th-century historian Abu'l-Fazl ibn Mubarak mentions in his Ain-i-Akbari that the addition of the suffix "al" came from the fact that the ancient rajahs of the land raised mounds of earth in lowlands at the foot of the hills which were called "al".[35] This is also mentioned in Ghulam Husain Salim's Riyaz-us-Salatin.[36]
The Indo-Aryan suffix Desh is derived from the Sanskrit word deśha, which means "land" or "country". Hence, the name Bangladesh means "Land of Bengal" or "Country of Bengal".[31]
History
Main article: History of Bangladesh
Part of a series on the
History of Bangladesh
1776 Map of Bengal Subah
EtymologyTimelineTraditionalUrheimat
Ancient
Classical
Mediaeval
Modern
Contemporary
Related articles
flag Bangladesh portal
vte
The history of Bangladesh dates back over four millennia to the Chalcolithic period. The region's early history was characterized by a succession of Hindu and Buddhist kingdoms and empires that fought for control over the Bengal region. Islam arrived in the 8th century and gradually became dominant from the early 13th century with the conquests led by Bakhtiyar Khalji in 1204 and the activities of Sunni missionaries like Shah Jalal. Muslim rulers promoted the spread of Islam by building mosques across the region. In 1338 Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah established independent sultanate in Bengal, establishing the capital at Sonargaon and founded an individual currency. The Bengal Sultanate expanded under rulers like Shamsuddin Ilyas Shah, leading to economic prosperity and military dominance, with Bengal being referred to by Europeans as the richest country to trade with. The region later became a part of the Mughal Empire. By the 18th century, Mughal Bengal emerged as the wealthiest province of the empire. [37]
Following the decline of the Mughal Empire in the early 1700s, Bengal became a semi-independent state under the Nawabs of Bengal, founded by Murshid Quli Khan in 1717. In 1757 the state led by Siraj-ud-Daulah was defeated by the British East India Company in the Battle of Plassey. The British abolished local rule in Bengal in 1793 following their victories at the Battle of Plassey (1757) and the Battle of Buxar (1764), effectively taking complete control of the region; this event is considered the end of the Nawab's power in Bengal and the start of direct British rule in Bengal. Bengal played a crucial role in the Industrial Revolution in Britain at the expense of flight of Bengal's capital, and also faced significant deindustrialization. The Great Bengal famine of 1770 resulted in millions of deaths. The Bengal Presidency was established during British rule.[38]
The etymology of Bangladesh ("Bengali country") can be traced to the early 20th century, when Bengali patriotic songs, such as Aaji Bangladesher Hridoy by Rabindranath Tagore and Namo Namo Namo Bangladesh Momo by Kazi Nazrul Islam, used the term in 1905 and 1932 respectively.[28] Starting in the 1950s, Bengali nationalists used the term in political rallies in East Pakistan.
The term Bangla is a major name for both the Bengal region and the Bengali language. The origins of the term Bangla are unclear, with theories pointing to a Bronze Age proto-Dravidian tribe,[29] and the Iron Age Vanga Kingdom.[30] The earliest known usage of the term is the Nesari plate in 805 AD. The term Vangala Desa is found in 11th-century South Indian records.[31][32] The term gained official status during the Sultanate of Bengal in the 14th century.[33][34] Shamsuddin Ilyas Shah proclaimed himself as the first "Shah of Bangala" in 1342.[33] The word Bangāl became the most common name for the region during the Islamic period.[35] 16th-century historian Abu'l-Fazl ibn Mubarak mentions in his Ain-i-Akbari that the addition of the suffix "al" came from the fact that the ancient rajahs of the land raised mounds of earth in lowlands at the foot of the hills which were called "al".[36] This is also mentioned in Ghulam Husain Salim's Riyaz-us-Salatin.[37]
The Indo-Aryan suffix Desh is derived from the Sanskrit word deśha, which means "land" or "country". Hence, the name Bangladesh means "Land of Bengal" or "Country of Bengal".[32]
History
Main article: History of Bangladesh
The history of Bangladesh dates back over four millennia to the Chalcolithic period. The region's early history was characterized by a succession of Hindu and Buddhist kingdoms and empires that fought for control over the Bengal region. Islam arrived in the 8th century and gradually became dominant from the early 13th century with the conquests led by Bakhtiyar Khalji in 1204 and the activities of Sunni missionaries like Shah Jalal. Muslim rulers promoted the spread of Islam by building mosques across the region. In 1338 Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah established independent sultanate in Bengal, establishing the capital at Sonargaon and founded an individual currency. The Bengal Sultanate expanded under rulers like Shamsuddin Ilyas Shah, leading to economic prosperity and military dominance, with Bengal being referred to by Europeans as the richest country to trade with. The region later became a part of the Mughal Empire. By the 18th century, Mughal Bengal emerged as the wealthiest province of the empire. [38]
Following the decline of the Mughal Empire in the early 1700s, Bengal became a semi-independent state under the Nawabs of Bengal, founded by Murshid Quli Khan in 1717. In 1757 the state led by Siraj-ud-Daulah was defeated by the British East India Company in the Battle of Plassey. The British abolished local rule in Bengal in 1793 following their victories at the Battle of Plassey (1757) and the Battle of Buxar (1764), effectively taking complete control of the region; this event is considered the end of the Nawab's power in Bengal and the start of direct British rule in Bengal. Bengal played a crucial role in the Industrial Revolution in Britain at the expense of flight of Bengal's capital, and also faced significant deindustrialization. The Great Bengal famine of 1770 resulted in millions of deaths. The Bengal Presidency was established during British rule.[39]
The borders of modern Bangladesh were established with the partition of Bengal between India and Pakistan during the Partition of India in August 1947, when the region became East Pakistan as part of the newly formed State of Pakistan following the end of the British rule in the region. The Proclamation of Bangladeshi Independence on 26 March 1971 by Sheikh Mujibur Rahman led to the nine-month-long Bangladesh Liberation War, which culminated in the emergence of the independent People's Republic of Bangladesh after victory was achieved on 16 December 1971. Dhaka became the capital of independent Bangladesh.
Siraj-ud-Daulah, the last independent Nawab of Bengal
The Constitution of Bangladesh, enacted in 1972, established a democratic state with fundamental rights, an independent judiciary, and an elected parliament called the Jatiya Sangsad.[40] Since gaining independence, Bangladesh has faced issues of political instability, economic reconstruction, and social transformation. The country experienced one party socialism under Sheikh Mujib in 1975, followed by military coups and military rule, notably under General Ziaur Rahman and General Hussain Muhammad Ershad. During the 1970s and the 1980s gradual economic liberalization and free market reforms were promoted, while Islam was declared the state religion in 1988. The country however experienced severe population boom despite its small land.[41][42][43] The restoration of parliamentary democracy in 1991 saw power alternate between the Awami League and the BNP. For most of the 21st Century, Bangladesh has achieved significant economic growth, emerging as one of the world's fastest-growing economies, driven by its garment industry, remittances, and infrastructure development. However, it continues to grapple with political instability, human rights issues, and the impact of climate change. The return of the Awami League to power on 6 January 2009 under Sheikh Hasina's leadership saw economic progress but criticisms of authoritarianism. Bangladesh has played a critical role in addressing regional issues, including the Rohingya refugee crisis, which has strained its resources and highlighted its humanitarian commitments.
The poverty rate went down from 80% in 1971 to 44% in 1991 to 13% in 2021.[44][45][46] Bangladesh emerged as the second-largest economy in South Asia,[47][48] surpassing the per capita income levels of both India and Pakistan.[49][48] As part of the green transition, Bangladesh's industrial sector emerged as a leader in building green factories, with the country having the largest number of certified green factories in the world in 2023.[50] In January 2024, Awami League led by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina secured a fourth straight term in Bangladesh's controversial general election. Following nationwide protests against the Awami League government, on 5 August 2024, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina was forced to resign and flee to India.[51][52][53][54][55] An interim government was formed on 8 August 2024, with Nobel laureate Muhammad Yunus as the Chief Advisor.[56]
Geography
Main article: Geography of Bangladesh

Physical map of Bangladesh
Bangladesh is in South Asia on the Bay of Bengal. It is surrounded almost entirely by neighbouring India, and shares a small border with Myanmar to its southeast, though it lies very close to Nepal, Bhutan, and China. The country is divided into three regions. Most of the country is dominated by the fertile Ganges Delta, the largest river delta in the world.[57] The northwest and central parts of the country are formed by the Madhupur and the Barind plateaus. The northeast and southeast are home to evergreen hill ranges.
The Ganges delta is formed by the confluence of the Ganges (local name Padma or Pôdda), Brahmaputra (Jamuna or Jomuna), and Meghna rivers and their tributaries. The Ganges unites with the Jamuna (main channel of the Brahmaputra) and later joins the Meghna, finally flowing into the Bay of Bengal. Bangladesh is called the "Land of Rivers",[58] as it is home to over 57 trans-boundary rivers, the most of any nation-state. Water issues are politically complicated since Bangladesh is downstream of India.[59]
Bangladesh is predominantly rich fertile flat land. Most of it is less than 12 m (39 ft) above sea level, and it is estimated that about 10% of its land would be flooded if the sea level were to rise by 1 m (3.3 ft).[60] 12% of the country is covered by hill systems. The country's haor wetlands are of significance to global environmental science. The highest point in Bangladesh is the Saka Haphong, located near the border with Myanmar, with an elevation of 1,064 m (3,491 ft).[61] Previously, either Keokradong or Tazing Dong were considered the highest.
In Bangladesh forest cover is around 14% of the total land area, equivalent to 1,883,400 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, down from 1,920,330 hectares (ha) in 1990. In 2020, naturally regenerating forest covered 1,725,330 hectares (ha) and planted forest covered 158,070 hectares (ha). Of the naturally regenerating forest 0% was reported to be primary forest (consisting of native tree species with no clearly visible indications of human activity) and around 33% of the forest area was found within protected areas. For the year 2015, 100% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership.[62][63]
Climate
Main articles: Geography of Bangladesh § Climate, and Climate change in Bangladesh
Flooding after the 1991 Bangladesh cyclone, which killed around 140,000 people
Straddling the Tropic of Cancer, Bangladesh's climate is tropical, with a mild winter from October to March and a hot, humid summer from March to June. The country has never recorded an air temperature below 0 °C (32 °F), with a record low of 1.1 °C (34.0 °F) in the northwest city of Dinajpur on 3 February 1905.[64] A warm and humid monsoon season lasts from June to October and supplies most of the country's rainfall. Natural calamities, such as floods, tropical cyclones, tornadoes, and tidal bores occur almost every year,[65] combined with the effects of deforestation, soil degradation and erosion. The cyclones of 1970 and 1991 were particularly devastating, the latter killing approximately 140,000 people.[66]
In September 1998, Bangladesh saw the most severe flooding in modern history, after which two-thirds of the country went underwater, along with a death toll of 1,000.[67] As a result of various international and national level initiatives in disaster risk reduction, the human toll and economic damage from floods and cyclones have come down over the years.[68] The 2007 South Asian floods ravaged areas across the country, leaving five million people displaced, with a death toll around 500.[69]
Climate change
Main article: Climate change in Bangladesh
Bangladesh is recognised to be one of the countries most vulnerable to climate change.[70][71] Over the course of a century, 508 cyclones have affected the Bay of Bengal region, 17 percent of which are believed to have made landfall in Bangladesh.[72] Natural hazards that come from increased rainfall, rising sea levels, and tropical cyclones are expected to increase as the climate changes, each seriously affecting agriculture, water and food security, human health, and shelter.[73] It is estimated that by 2050, a three-foot rise in sea levels will inundate some 20 percent of the land and displace more than 30 million people.[74] To address the sea level rise threat in Bangladesh, the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 has been launched.[75][76]
Biodiversity Main article: Fauna of Bangladesh A Bengal tiger, the national animal, in the Sundarbans